Latest blogpost on adding a database (#35)
okteto/blog-proposals: adding-a-database-to-your-app-using-okteto-stack.md

Temporary in-app databases are not ideal for web applications. Any unfortunate event such as an abrupt shutdown or restarting of the application will lead to the total loss of stored data.

In previous posts, you have learned how to [deploy applications directly from your console using Okteto Stacks](https://okteto.com/blog/building-and-deploying-a-fastapi-app-in-okteto-cloud/) and [how to deploy existing applications from Okteto's UI](https://okteto.com/blog/deploying-an-existing-application-with-okteto-cloud/) thereby seeing the immense adaptability of Okteto Stacks.

In this tutorial, you will be adding a database to store better your application data after which you will deploy it to your Okteto namespace from your command line.

## Initial Setup

Start by creating a fork of the application from [GitHub](https://github.com/okteto/fastapi-crud) and then clone it locally. In your local clone, set it up using the following commands:

```bash
$ cd fastapi-crud
$ python3 -m venv venv && source venv/bin/activate
(venv)$ pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Verify that the setup is complete by running:

```bash
python3 main.py
```

> After verifying the installation, update the `DOCKERHUBUSERNAME` variable in your stack file to your namespace name. Deploy the application with the command:

Author: Ah yes! I'll replace this with `okteto.dev`

```bash
(venv)$ okteto stack deploy --build
```

## Adding A Database
Before proceeding, verify that you have MongoDB installed or proceed to the [MongoDB's Installation page](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/installation/) to install MongoDB.

> To avoid data loss, you're going to rewrite the application logic to use a MongoDB database, which will be mounted as a container in your Okteto namespace.

Author: fixed.

    }

@app.get("/recipe", tags=["Recipe"])
def get_recipes() -> dict:
    recipes = get_all_recipes()
    return {
        "data": recipes
    }

@app.get("/recipe/{id}", tags=["Recipe"])
def get_recipe(id: str) -> dict:
    recipe = get_single_recipe(id)
    if recipe:
        return {
            "data": recipe
        }
    return {
        "error": "No such recipe with ID {} exist".format(id)
    }

@app.post("/recipe", tags=["Recipe"])
def add_recipe(recipe: RecipeSchema = Body(...)) -> dict:
    new_recipe = save_recipe(recipe.dict())
    return new_recipe

@app.put("/recipe", tags=["Recipe"])
def update_recipe(id: str, recipe_data: UpdateRecipeSchema)  -> dict:
    if not get_single_recipe(id):
        return {
            "error": "No such recipe exist"
        }

    update_recipe_data(id, recipe_data.dict())

    return {
        "message": "Recipe updated successfully."
    }

@app.delete("/recipe/{id}", tags=["Recipe"])
def delete_recipe(id: str) -> dict:
    if not get_single_recipe(id):
        return {
            "error": "Invalid ID passed"
        }

    remove_recipe(id)
    return {
        "message": "Recipe deleted successfully."
    }
```

> Update the `api/model.py` by removing the `id` field in the `RecipeSchema` model class.

Author: Sure, done.

```

Response:

```json
{
  "data": {
    "id": "601fdcd82fbbf462d33a6e34",
    "name": "Donut",
    "ingredients": [
      "Flour",
      "Milk",
      "Butter"
    ]
  }
}
```

Test the UPDATE route:

```bash
(venv)$ curl -X PUT "http://0.0.0.0:8080/recipe?id=601fdcd82fbbf462d33a6e34" -H  "accept: application/json" -H  "Content-Type: application/json" -d "{\"name\":\"Buns\",\"ingredients\":[\"Flour\",\"Milk\",\"Sugar\",\"Vegetable Oil\"]}"
```

Response:

```json
{
  "message": "Recipe updated successfully."
}
```

Lastly, test the DELETE route:

```bash
(venv)$ curl -X DELETE "http://0.0.0.0:8080/recipe/601fdcd82fbbf462d33a6e34" -H  "accept: application/json"
```

Response:

```json
{
  "message": "Recipe deleted successfully."
}
```

## Redeploying to Okteto

Okteto eases the stress of deployment and subsequent redeployment by allowing us update and upgrade existing applications from the stack file. Include another service for mongodb in your stack file:

```yaml
  mongodb:
    image: bitnami/mongodb:latest
    ports:
      - 27017
    resources:
      cpu: 100m
      memory: 128Mi
      storage: 1Gi
    volumes:
      - /bitnami/mongodb
```

> In the code above, you added another service, `mongodb`, to house a MongoDB container from bitnami; the default port **27017** is exposed under the ports heading.

Reviewer: Could you also mention that this time we are not using 'public' because we only want the API service to be able to access our mongodb instance?

Reviewer: al explain that we added `volumes` to make our data persistent.

Author: Fixed

Under the `fastapi` service, add an environment heading containing the `DB_HOST` the database file reads using the `decouple` library:

```yaml
environment:
  - DB_HOST=mongodb://mongodb:27017
  - secret=dev 
```

With the stack file updated, deploy it using the command:

```bash
(venv)$ okteto stack deploy --build
```

> Log on to your [Okteto Dashboard](https://cloud.okteto.com), a MongoDB container alongside your application is mounted:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Log on to your [Okteto Dashboard](https://cloud.okteto.com), and notice that your application now also has  a MongoDB container alongside your application:
```

![Dashboard](https://res.cloudinary.com/adeshina/image/upload/v1612703043/rlkchjwvcomtq3zuhfl9.png)

> Test the newly deployed route by replacing `deployedapp` from previous requests with the live application URL. From your terminal, run the command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Test the `recipe` route by replacing `deployedapp` from previous requests with the live application URL. From your terminal, run the command:
```
